---
layout: post
title: Tell me - what was your PhD about? 
image:
  feature: sample-image-24.jpg
  credit: Charles University, Prague, 2013

---

This post is an attempt for me to organise in my own head an answer to a question I'm asked all the time: what was your PhD about?

I studied pure mathematics. Research mathematics is traditionally divided into two areas: applied mathematics, which deals with equations and concepts motivated from other sciences and from modelling real-world phenomena, and pure mathematics, which deals with studying mathematics for its own sake. Sometimes the two branches cross over, and sometimes mathematics that was once considered pure is later found to have applications.

My branch of pure mathematics was algebra. Algebra is the study of mathematical structure. When algebraists talk about structure, they mean the kind of structure that numbers and number systems have. For example, the integers, with their operations of addition and negation, form a type of algebraic structure known as a group. There are many other types of groups, and algebraists (specifically group theorists) busy themselves with the task of *classifying* groups: that is, coming up with a list of all possible group structures. This is a monumentally difficult task that was only solved in the last decade. 

Certain groups are particularly interesting in their own right. One of these groups is called the symmetric group. It has been studied for over a century and can be found in physics, chemistry and other places in nature. The symmetric group has given rise to its own branch of algebra known as representation theory: this was the sub-branch of algebra that I studied. 

Specifically, I was concerned with the *classification* of *representations* of a family of algebraic objects related to symmetric groups. 